Cool. Let's get started. This lecture is gonna
be about sockets. And if you did your
pitches and you were, like, planning to make
a game, you probably heard us talking about
sockets. Because it's a very important part of
live interaction in websites. So whether you're making
a chat or you're making a game, live
interaction is very important. You want very low
latency. And to to support many clients being
able to interact at the same time with
a common, for example, game state, you pretty
much need to use sockets. There's really no
other way to do it. So hopefully through
this lecture and the next workshop, you will
be able to learn the tools that you
need to implement sockets in your website. So
just a quick review. And since we've already
seen traffic before for the past hour, we
don't have to go too in-depth. But currently,
we have a single chat within our Chatbook
that's to all chat. This is to all
recipients. And, you might or clearly chat's not
solved yet, but it looks like it. And
the reason it's not solved is because, you
have to refresh the page to see new
messages. And this is really inconvenient. So the
tool that we'll use for Real Time Chatbook
is called socket.io. This is just one, I
guess, implementation of web sockets. And this is
the most common use, I get, use like
socket package in JavaScript. So the way we
really want Chatbook to work is if someone
like Kenny sends a message using the post
request slash API slash message. We want the
server to be able to tell all the
users or all the clients that are like
listening in on this chat that Kenny just
sent hi. But you know how API requests
work. The way it works is a client
sends a request to the server and then
the server responds back to the client. But
the server can't talk directly to the clients
that haven't interacted with it through API requests.
So API requests are really one way, at
least they're initiated from the client to the
server. And servers can't initiate conversations back towards
the client, which is the main problem. So
again, this is the limitation of HTTP requests.
You can't have the server sending data to
the client unless a request is made from
the client specifically for data from the server.
So you might be thinking, well one workaround
to having the server send you information using
HTTP requests is to constantly pull the server
for like new updates. So I can ask
the server, like are there any messages in
the chat? Has someone sent anything? And I
can do this like really often, maybe like
every second or even less to mimic the
idea of like a live chat. And then
eventually, Kenny might send or make a post
request and then the server will be updated.
And then at some point, Sammy might send
a request and then see that the chat
has been updated. And then, I guess that's
fine, but this is very slow. This requires
a lot of requests every second. And in
real applications like games or chats, this is
really impractical because you're gonna have to be
moving at like a much faster pace. So
this pulling, you would have to do maybe
like every, like 10 times a second or
something and that's just really unreasonable. So the
solution is to teach the server how to
initiate conversations. And this is where sockets comes
in. Again, this is socket. Socket. Io is
the library we're using and it uses websocket
which is solving the problem we just mentioned.
And the way you should think about it
is we have sort of a connection between
a server and a client. We'll call this
like the socket connection. And like once a
client logs in or opens a web page,
we sort of initiate this client or initiate
this connection between the client and the server.
So this connection persists. We can think of
it as like an imaginary string between the
two. And we have multiple clients connected to
the servers at all times. And what the
server can do is they can broadcast a
message to the client. Now there's many options
for this, as you'll see. The server can
broadcast the same message to all the clients
or they can broadcast a message to individual
clients. There's really those two cases and we'll
see how to implement those cases. But at
all times as well, the client is listening,
so whenever a server does broadcast a message,
the client can react immediately to that message,
which is why sockets makes it why sockets
is really powerful for lifetime like reactions. So
in our example of cat book or chat
book, if Kenny posts a message using the
slash api slash message route, then if we
have sockets, sort of like connections between each
client client server pair, Then WebSockets allows us
to have the server broadcast a message to
all the clients that a new message has
been posted. So again, what we'll probably be
implementing is within this post request, when Kenny
makes a post request to slash api slash
slash message, this is an event that causes
the socket event to emit from the server
to the clients. Any questions so far about
what a socket is conceptually? Okay. So in
terms of code, this is what it's gonna
look like. And this is the server code.
So everything on the server side is gonna
use something called the server manage sorry, the
socket manager. Now this is code that we've
already coded for you and in fact, I'm
gonna go to w seven starter just to
look at this code and show you real
quick. And you can follow along if you
want, but, you can also just look at
this screen. Okay, so we have the server
socket JS file inside the server. And just
opening this up, we see that all this
has oh, sorry. Closed it. All this is
given to you and essentially all the server
socket is is sorry, the socket all the
socket manager is is like a collection of
a few functions that we've defined for you.
So this file, server socket dot j s,
is exporting an object containing these eight functions,
init, add user, remove user, etcetera, which are
all functions that we define in the same
file. But essentially the usage is when you
import the file, you import it as like
socket manager. So you would do like const
socket manager equals require server socket dot j
s or something. And then you can just
use the functions in here by doing like
socket manager dot init or socket manager dot
add user, etcetera. And in this case, to
broadcast a message from the server to everyone
connected, we use the dot getio function. So
getio is gonna take, or is gonna like
pretty much take all the sockets of the
clients. So get io is gonna broadcast to
every single client who's listening to the server
right now. And then dot emit is like
what actually emits the message. And there's two
parts to an emit. One is the title
or the event name. This is gonna be
a string. And then the other is data,
which is what you're emitting. So this is
usually gonna be an object. And I'll go
through an example in a bit, but first,
this is the server side again. The server
emits to the clients and they emit some
event name as well as objects tied to
that event. And then on the client side,
we have socket and then dot on is
like pretty much whenever we see some event
name, we do some function. So on listens
for an event name and then whatever callback
function is passed in is run whenever this
event happens. So if these two events are
the same, then what it would probably look
like is, like, for example, if we have
two events or the same event called new
pset happening, and if we think of the
professor as, like, the server, then the professor
can omit an event called new pset and
then pass in data, which is the pset
object, and then submit. And then the students
who are all listening to the professor will,
have a socket dot on where they listen
to this new event or there or sorry,
this new pset event. And then whenever this
event happens, they do some function, like start
working or something. In code, it would look
something like this, where we pass in a
string to emit, and then we pass in
an object to the second argument. And then
for the student side, the client side, on
some event, we have a callback function where
the argument of the callback function is the
data that's passed in in the second argument
of the server side of it. So this
object that was passed in is what the
callback function in the client side takes in
as an argument. So if we take in
the pset as the argument, then we can
do stuff with the pset looking at the
fields like if or while pset dot do
is out tomorrow, then do something, and then
we can access the questions as well. And
in our chat box setting, if we have
our socket manager in the server side emit
a message event, which is like when someone
sends a message to the chat, we want
the server to pass in like what message
was sent, so message objects that we saw
previously in Chatbook. And now the clients that
are all listening can or listen for this
message event and whenever that happens, then we
have a callback that would take in this
message object and then do something with it.
For example, render it on the screen, add
add it to the database or something like
that. Sorry, not add it to the not
add it to the database but like render
on the screen. Any questions about how this
example works? Okay. So I just wanna show
you an example of, like, an implementation just
so it's less foreign. So if I check
out the end of the workshop that we're
about to do And then look at, like,
the server side. I guess an API dot
JS. So within API dot JS, notice that
we're eventually gonna be importing the socket manager
from the server socket file. And again, socket
manager is whatever is exported from this file,
which is just a collection of these functions.
So init, get io, etcetera. And then whenever
we do some something like have a message
be posted to the server, This is an
example of where we want sockets to happen
because, like, if someone posts a message, we
want all our clients to know immediately that
that happened. And that's why in the declaration
for the post route for slash message, we're
gonna have our socket manager emit the message
event that contains the message that was posted.
So in code, it literally literally looks like
what it was in the slides. It's just
socket manager dot get io dot emit and
then the string, that's the event name and
the object that we're passing to the client.
And then on the client side, if I
just, look in the code base for, like,
dot on and then message, I can see
where a client would be listening to the
message event. So, yeah, like, this is in
Chatbook, which is expected because I really only
care about the message event within Chatbook. So
without knowing too much context of the code,
it's maybe a bit confusing, but just looking
at this one line, the client is essentially
listening to the message event. And then when
it receives the message event, it adds a
message. And addMessage is a callback function. Specifically,
message is a callback function that takes in
whatever we passed from the server and the
emit part, like the second argument of emit,
all message sorry, add message takes in an
object like that as the argument to the
callback. So that's just what it would look
like in code. And you'll really only see
these two lines of code related to sockets.
There's, like, socket dot on for the client
side. There's also sorry. On the client side,
there's like, socket dot on as well as
socket dot off, which we'll go over in
a bit in the next workshop. And then
for the server side, it's really just we
do, like, socket manager dot init or get
io or, like, add user, etcetera. And if
you control shift f for a socket manager,
you can see all the places where we
end up using, like, the functions that are
defined in socket manager. Okay. But that's enough
looking into the code since we'll be looking
at it anyways next workshop. Just recapping the
chatbook front end design. Eventually, we want the
chatbook components to have both the chat list
and the chat as children components. Right now
it's just the chat. We don't see like
a chat list on the left that we've
seen in like the diagrams or the images.
Like here. And then the chat list is
gonna display all the single users or which
are those like buttons that you can click
to toggle the chats. But, yeah, like looking
more into Chatbook, we have the chat list
on the left and then chat on the
right. And then within chat, we've already implemented
this having the single message components up here
and then the new message component down here.
And then looking at chat list, we have
single users being displayed here which are all
the active users who are connected to Chatbook.
So if you were pulling up weblab. Isexample
yesterday, you saw, like, every time a user
logged in, or I. Like, whenever a client
initiated a connection with the server, you could
actually see their name pop up on the
left because they were added to, like, the
list of total active users who are connected
to the server. And yeah, so the main
places where we're gonna be using sockets is
in the chat so that when a message
sorry, like, when a user sends a message,
all the recipients of that message will be
notified. And then we're also gonna be using
it in the chat list. As I just
mentioned, whenever a user joins, we're gonna be
able to see their name pop up in
the left, in this list. And then for
the back end, we have two primary routes.
One is slash chat, which gets the chat
between a user and a recipient. Right now
it's just getting the chat for all chat.
We're gonna change it so that we can
have, like, or get the chats between like
you, the user, as well as one individual
person, so DMs. And then the post route
for slash message is just gonna send a
message to not everyone but or it could
be everyone but also it could be between
you and a specific recipient. So this is
pretty much the same as what we had
in workshop six. We're just gonna be making
the functionality to do stuff only between you
and a single recipient instead of all chat.
And then for like getting the chat between,
like, you and a recipient, we're gonna use,
like, the recipient ID fields when we pass
it into the get request. So this is
gonna be accessed using, like, rec dot query
dot recipient underscore ID is 25. And then
post, again, is just we take rec dot
body dot content is like the value of
the message. Okay. Feel free to look at
web webweblab.is/chatbookdocs for more information about Chatbook, like
the types that we're using as well as
the routes that we've created. But, yeah, after
lunch, which is gonna be now, we'll be
doing Chatbook with sockets to have real time
communication. And before that or during that, if
you open up weblab. Issocketguide socket docs, you'll
find some pretty helpful information or documentation. And
I think to start off, weblab.is/socketdocs is probably
more useful. This essentially just shows you, like,
all of the server side functions that you
can do with the socket manager. And then
as well as like what you do on
the client side for sockets. So socket to
on is like the primary thing that you'll
look at. Okay. But yeah, that should be
it for the lecture. I think Lucas will
come up here for food announcements. And if
you could, please fill out the feedback form.
Thanks. Alright, guys. Today we have Domino's. So
you guys already know the drill. Please fill
out your registration from weblab.in/portal. Please eat outside.
And, yeah, think that's it. There's vegan and
vegetarian options on the on the right side.